                        General TADS Game Instructions
                        ----======================----

                        Written by Michael J. Roberts
(Edited slightly by David Baggett for ADVENTIONS and again by Stephen Granade.)


                               Playing the game
                               ---==========---

In an adventure game, you play by typing commands that describe what you want
to do. Unfortunately, the game isn't as smart as you are, so it can't
understand nearly as many sentences as a person could. In this section, we'll
describe most of the types of commands that you will need to use while playing
the game.

Each time you see the prompt, ">", you type a command.  Your command should be
a simple imperative sentence, or a series of imperatives separated by periods.
Press the RETURN (or ENTER) key when you are done typing your command; the game
doesn't start interpreting the command until you press RETURN.

You can use capital or small letters in any mixture.  You can use words such as
THE and AN when they're appropriate, but you can omit them if you prefer.  You
can abbreviate any word to six or more letters, but the game will pay attention
to all of the letters you type.  For example, you could refer to a FLASHLIGHT
with the words FLASHL, FLASHLIG, and so forth, but not with FLASHSDF.


                                    Travel
                                    -====-

At any time during the game, you are in a location.  The game desribes your
location when you first enter, and again any time you type LOOK.  In a given
location, you can reach anything described, so you don't need to type commands
to move about within a location.  You move from place to place in the game by
typing the direction you want to go.  The game will always tell you the
directions that you can go from a location, although it usually doesn't tell
you what you will find when you go there.  You will probably find it helpful to
make a map as you explore the game.  The directions the game recognizes are
NORTH, SOUTH, EAST, WEST, NORTHEAST, SOUTHEAST, NORTHWEST, SOUTHWEST, UP, and
DOWN.  You can abbreviate these to N, S, E, W, NE, SE, NW, SW, U, and D.  In
some locations you can also use IN and OUT.

Generally, backtracking will take you back to where you started.  For example,
if you start off in a kitchen, go north into a living room, then go south
again, you will be back in the kitchen.

Most of the time, when the game describes a door or doorway, you don't need to
open the door to go through the passage; the game will do this for you.  Only
when the game explicitly describes a closed door (or other impediment to
travel) will you need to type a command to open the door.


                                   Objects
                                   -=====-

In the game, you will find many objects that you can carry or otherwise
manipulate.  When you want to do something with an object, type a simple
command that tells the game what you want to do; be explicit.  For example,
you could type READ THE BOOK or OPEN THE DRAWER.  Most of the objects in the
game have fairly obvious uses; you shouldn't have to think of any obscure or
unrelated words to manipulate the objects.

You generally don't have to specify exactly where you want to put an object
that you wish to carry; you can just type TAKE (followed by the object's name)
to carry an object.  We didn't think it was particularly interesting to force
you to specify which object you wish to put in your left pocket, which you wish
to carry in your right hand, and so forth.  However, there is a limit to how
many objects you can carry at once, and to how much weight you can handle.
You can carry more objects (but not more weight, of course) by putting some
items inside containers (for example, you may be able to put several objects
into a box, and carry the box), since this reduces the number of objects you
actually have to juggle at once.

Some basic verbs that you will use frequently are TAKE (to pick up an object),
DROP (to drop an object), OPEN and CLOSE, and EXAMINE (which you can abbreviate
to X).  You can PUT an object IN or ON another object when appropriate.  The
game recognizes many other verbs as well.  We tried to make all of the verbs
obvious; if you find a knob, you will be able to TURN it, and if you find a
button, you will be able to PUSH it.  By the same token, you probably won't
need to turn the button or push the knob.

Some examples of commands that the game recognizes are shown below.  These
aren't necessarily commands that you'll ever type while playing the game, but
they illustrate some of the verbs and sentence formats that you may use.

  GO NORTH
  NORTH
  N
  UP
  TAKE THE BOX
  PUT THE FLOPPY DISK INTO THE BOX
  CLOSE BOX
  LOOK AT DISK
  TAKE DISK OUT OF BOX
  LOOK IN BOX
  WEAR THE CONICAL HAT
  TAKE OFF HAT
  CLOSE BOX
  TURN ON THE LANTERN
  LIGHT MATCH
  LIGHT CANDLE WITH MATCH
  RING BELL
  POUR WATER INTO BUCKET
  PUSH BUTTON
  TURN KNOB
  EAT COOKIE
  DRINK MILK
  THROW KNIFE AT THIEF
  KILL TROLL WITH SWORD
  READ NEWSPAPER
  LOOK THROUGH WINDOW
  UNLOCK DOOR WITH KEY
  TIE THE ROPE TO THE HOOK
  CLIMB UP THE LADDER
  TURN THE KNOB
  JUMP
  TYPE "HELLO" ON THE KEYBOARD
  GET IN THE CAR
  GET OUT OF THE CAR
  GET ON THE HORSE
  GIVE WAND TO WIZARD
  ASK WIZARD ABOUT WAND



                               Other characters
                               ---==========---

You may encounter other characters in the game.  You can interact in certain
ways with these characters.  For example, you can GIVE things to them, and you
could try to attack them.  In addition, you can ask characters about things:

  ASK WIZARD ABOUT WAND

Some characters will tell you quite a bit in response to such queries, while
others will be more taciturn.


                                     Time
                                     -==-

Time in the game passes only in response to commands you type.  Nothing happens
while the game is waiting for you to type something.  Each turn takes about the
same amount of time.  If you want to let some game time pass, because you think
something is about to happen, you can type WAIT (or just Z).


                                    Score
                                    -===-

The game assigns you a score while you play, indicating how close you are to
finishing it.  At certain points in the game, you will be awarded points when
you solve some puzzle or obtain some item.  The score is intended to provide
you with a measure of your progress in the game, and increases as you get
further in the game; you never lose points once they are earned.


                             Referring to objects
                             ---==============---

You can usually use multiple objects in your sentences.  You separate the
objects by the word AND or a comma.  For example:

  TAKE THE BOX, THE FLOPPY DISK, AND THE ROPE
  PUT DISK AND ROPE IN BOX
  DROP BOX AND BALL

You can use the word ALL to refer to everything that is applicable to your
command, and you can use EXCEPT (right after the word ALL) to exclude certain
objects.

  TAKE ALL
  PUT ALL EXCEPT DISK AND ROPE INTO BOX
  TAKE EVERYTHING OUT OF THE BOX
  TAKE ALL OFF SHELF

The word ALL refers to everything that makes sense for your command, excluding
things inside containers that are used in the command.  For example, if you are
carrying a box and a rope, and the box contains a floppy disk, typing DROP ALL
will drop only the box and the rope; the floppy disk will remain in the box.

You an use IT and THEM to refer to the last object or objects that you used in
a command.  Some examples:

  TAKE THE BOX
  OPEN IT
  TAKE THE DISK AND THE ROPE
  PUT THEM IN THE BOX


                          Multiple commands on a line
                          ----===================----

You can put multiple commands on a single input line by separating the commands
with periods or the word THEN, or with a comma or the word AND.  Each command
still counts as a separate turn.  For example:

  TAKE THE DISK AND PUT IT IN THE BOX
  TAKE BOX. OPEN IT.
  UNLOCK THE DOOR WITH THE KEY.
  OPEN IT, AND THEN GO NORTH

If the game doesn't understand one of the commands on the input line, it will
tell you what it couldn't understand, and it will ignore the rest of the
commands on the line.


                              Ambiguous commands
                              ---============---

If you type a command that leaves out some important information, the game will
try to figure out what you mean anyway.  When the game can be reasonably sure
about what you mean, because only one object would make sense with the command,
the game will make an assumption about the missing information and act as
though you had supplied it.  For example,

  >TIE THE ROPE
  (to the hook)
  The rope is now tied to the hook.  The end of the rope nearly reaches the
  floor of the pit below.

If your command is ambiguous enough that the game doesn't feel safe making
assumptions about what you meant, the game will ask you for more information.
You can answer these questions by typing only the missing information.  If you
decide you didn't want to bother with the command after all, you can just type
a new command; the game will ignore the question it asked.  For example:

  >UNLOCK THE DOOR
  What do you want to unlock the door with?
  >THE KEY
  Which key do you mean, the gold key, or the silver key?
  >GOLD
  The door is now unlocked.


                                Unknown words
                                --=========--

The game will sometimes use words in its descriptions that it doesn't
understand in your commands.  For example, you may see a description such as,
"The planet's rings are visible as a thin arc high overhead, glimmering in the
sunlight."  If the game doesn't know words such as "rings," you can assume that
they're not needed to play the game; they're in the descriptions simply to make
the story more interesting.  For those objects that are important, the game
recognizes many synonyms; if the game doesn't understand a word you use, or any
of its common synonyms, you are probably trying something that is not necessary
to continue.


                             Saving and restoring
                             ---==============---

You can store a snapshot of the game's state in a disk file at any time.
Later, if your character is killed or you find that it has become impossible to
finish the game (due to a lost or broken object, for example), you can restore
the state of the game exactly as it was when you saved it to the disk file.
You can save your position as many times as you like, using different disk
files for each position.  Saving the game also allows you to play the game over
the course of many days, without having to start over from scratch each time
you come back to the game.

To save the game, type SAVE at any prompt.  The game will ask you for the name
of a disk file to use to store the game state.  (You will have to specify a
filename suitable for your computer system, and the disk must have enough space
to store the game state.  The game will tell you if the game was not saved
properly for some reason.)  You should give the file a name that does not exist
on your disk.  If you save the game into a file that already exists, the data
previously in that file will be destroyed.

When you wish to restore a game, type RESTORE at the command prompt.  The game
will ask you for the name of a disk file that you specified with a previous
SAVE command.  After reading the disk file, the game state will be restored to
exactly the position when you saved it.


                               Special commands
                               ---==========---

The game understands several special commands that you can use to control it.
You can use these commands at any prompt.

ABOUT: Prints information about Losing Your Grip.

AGAIN or G: Repeats your last command. If your last input line was
composed of several commands, only the last command on the line is repeated.

AUTHOR: About the author.

COMMANDS: Shows a list of these special commands.

CREDITS: Lists the credits for Losing Your Grip.

DEDICATION: Prints the game's dedication.

EXITS: Lists the possible exits from your location.

HINT: Gives a hint about whatever puzzle you are stuck on. Only valid in
registered copies.

INVENTORY or I: Shows the list of items you are carrying.

INVENTORY TALL: Changes the inventory style to Infocom's style.

INVENTORY WIDE: Changes the inventory style to the default TADS style.

LOOK or L: Gives the full description of your location.

NOTIFY: Turns score notification on or off. Score notification is on by
default.

OOPS: Allows you to correct the spelling of a word in the last command. You
can use OOPS when the game displays this complaint: "I don't know the word
<word>."  Immediately after this message, you can type OOPS followed by the
corrected spelling of the misspelled word. You can only type one word after
OOPS, so this command doesn't allow you to correct certain types of errors,
such as when you run two words together without a space.

QUIT or Q: Ends the game.

REGISTER: Information on how to register Losing Your Grip.

RESTART: Starts the game over from the beginning.

RESTORE: Restores a position previously saved with the SAVE command.

REVIEW: Reviews the hints you have already been given.

SAVE: Stores the current state of the game in a disk file, so that you can
come back to the same place later with the RESTORE command.

SCORE: Shows you your current score and the maximum possible score.

SCRIPT: Starts writing everything you see on the screen (both your commands
and the game's responses) to a disk file. The game will ask you for a filename
to be used for the transcript; you should select a filename that does not yet
exist on your disk, because if you use an existing filename, data in that
file will be destroyed. Use the UNSCRIPT command to stop making the
transcript.

TERSE: For impatient users, this tells the game that you wish to see only
short descriptions of locations you have already seen when you reenter them.
See also the VERBOSE command.

UNDO: Tells the game you want to take back your last command. The game state
will be restored to the way it was before the previous command, as though the
command were never issued at all. You can do this more than once in a row.

UNSCRIPT: Turns off the transcript that was begun with the SCRIPT command.

VERBOSE: For amnesiac players, this tells the game to show you the full
description of every location you enter, whether or not you have seen the
description before. This is the default mode. See also the TERSE command.

VERSION: Shows the current version number of the game.

WAIT or Z: Causes game time to pass. When the game is waiting for you to type
a command, no game time passes; you can use this command to wait for something
to happen.


                          Command editing and recall
                          ----==================----

On most computer systems, the game has a special feature that allows you to use
your keyboard's editing keys to modify an input line as you are typing it, and
to recall commands that you have previously typed for editing and re-entry.
The specific keys you use vary depending on your system, and some systems don't
support this feature at all; see the system-specific documentation for more
information.

While you are typing a command, the game allows you to go back and change part
of the line without "backspacing" over the rest of the line to get there.
Simply use your left and right cursor-arrow keys to move the cursor to any
point in the command line.  The BACKSPACE key deletes a character to the left
of the cursor, and the DELETE key deletes the character at which the cursor is
located.

You can insert new text at the cursor simply by typing the text.  You can press
the RETURN (or ENTER) key with the cursor at any point in the line (the cursor
need not be at the end of the command line).

You can recall the previous command that you entered by pressing the up
cursor-arrow key; pressing the up-arrow key again recalls the command before
that, and so forth.  Using the down cursor-arrow key reverses this process,
until you get back to the original command that you were typing before you
started pressing the up-arrow key.

Once you have recalled a prior command, you can re-enter it by pressing the
RETURN key.  In addition, you can edit the command, as described above, before
entering the command.

The exact number of commands the game retains depends on the lengths of the
commands, but more than a hundred of the most recent commands are generally
retained at any given time.


                                 Review mode
                                 --=======--

Another special feature that the game supports on many computer systems is
called "review mode."  The game remembers text as it "scrolls" off the screen;
by invoking recall mode, you can go back and look at text that is no longer
visible on the screen.  On most systems, review mode is activated by pressing
the function key F1.

Once in review mode, the status line that is normally at the top of the screen
will be replaced by the review mode help line.  This line shows the keystrokes
you use to view previous screenfuls of text, and also shows you the key that
exits review mode and resumes normal game play (this is generally the game key
that you used to activate review mode).

While in review mode, your screen becomes a window onto the text that the game
has stored away.  When you first activate review mode, you are looking at the
very bottom of this text, which is the screenful of text that was just
displayed.  Use the up and down cursor-arrow keys to move the window up and
down.  Pressing the up cursor-arrow key moves the window up one line, showing
you one line of text that has scrolled off the screen.  Most systems also
provide keys to move up and down by a full screenful (also called a "page.")

To resume game play, press the same key that you used to activate review mode.

The number of screenfuls of text that the game stores away for review depends
on how much text is actually on each screen, since the game has a limit on the
number of characters it can store, not on the number of lines.  Normally, more
than twenty of the most recent screens of text are saved and available for
review at any given time.
